Handling Presentational role conflict resolution (#1189)
act-rules/act-rules.github.io: pages/glossary/semantic-role.md

Valid semantic roles are defined by standards. For web content and applications these are defined within the various [WAI-ARIA specifications](https://act-rules.github.io/glossary/#wai-aria-specifications).

> The _semantic role_ of an element which is [included in the accessibility tree][] is the role this element has in the accessibility tree. Elements which are not [included in the accessibility tree][] have no semantic role.

Reviewer: So elements that aren't in the accessibility tree by definition have no role? That's a substantial change to one of our most used definitions. It means every time way say "has semantic role of X and is included in the accessibility tree" the second part becomes redundant. I'm hesitant about making that change. We'd have to update quite a few rules, make this "included in the accessibility tree" bit hidden away in the definition, which I don't like, and it feels a little unintuitive to me. For example, it would mean nothing can ever have a semantic role of "none". That's different from how semantic role is used by the ARIA working group.

I think we can add this in without such a substantial change to the definition.

```suggestion
The _semantic role_ of an element is its [explicit semantic role](#explicit-role) if it has any, otherwise, the [implicit semantic role](#implicit-role) is used. If the element has an [explicit semantic role[#explicit-role] of "presentation" or "none", but the element is, or would be, included in the accessibility tree when it is not [hidden](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.2/#dfn-hidden), the [implicit semantic role][#implicit-role] is used instead of the [explicit semantic role][#explicit-role].
```

Author: Very good point.
I wanted to try an avoid going through the full case study on our definition but this seems unavoidable…

Valid semantic roles are defined by standards. For web content and applications these are defined within the various [WAI-ARIA specifications](https://act-rules.github.io/glossary/#wai-aria-specifications).

The _semantic role_ of an element is determined by the first of these cases that applies:

> 1. **Conflict** If the element has an [explicit role][] which is either `none` or `presentation`, but the element is [included in the accessibility tree][] (or would be when it is not [hidden](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.2/#dfn-hidden)), then its _semantic role_ is its **[implicit role][]**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Conflict** If the element has an [explicit role][] which is either `none` or `presentation`, but the element is [included in the accessibility tree][], or would be when it is not [hidden](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.2/#dfn-hidden), then its _semantic role_ is its **[implicit role][]**.
```

Seems a little too important to be put in parentheses.

> 1. **(Conflict)** If the element has an [explicit role][] which is either `none` or `presentation`, but the element is [included in the accessibility tree][] (or would be when it is not [hidden](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.2/#dfn-hidden)), then its _semantic role_ is its **[implicit role][]**.

Reviewer: I think I'd prefer:

```md
1. **topic**: description
```

This is how these labelled items are done in WCAG.

> 2. **(Explicit)** If the element has an [explicit role][], then its _semantic role_ is its [explicit role][].

Reviewer: Here's a problem... Explicit / Implicit semantic role relies on the definition of semantic role. These are recursive definitions. We're going to need to solve that.

Author: Hmmm :thinking: 
Actually, the circular reference already exists in the current definitions…

---
My analysis of the circularity:
* there is some concept called "semantic role".
* there is some technical stuff called explicit/implicit role that are special case of the concept of semantic role.
* there is some technical stiff called "semantic role" which is define based on the explicit/implicit role and is thus also a case of the concept of semantic role.

Thus, the definition is not logically circular. This is more an unfortunate consequence of the fact that the concept and the technical thingie are named the same way…

This should be solved nonetheless.

---
In any case, given that this circularity already exists in the current definitions, and that I don’t think this PR is making things worse, I suggest to keep resolving that for another PR (keeping this one focused).

Valid semantic roles are defined by standards. For web content and applications these are defined within the various [WAI-ARIA specifications](https://act-rules.github.io/glossary/#wai-aria-specifications).

The _semantic role_ of an element is determined by the first of these cases that applies:

> 1. **Conflict** If the element has an [explicit role][] which is either `none` or `presentation`, but the element is [included in the accessibility tree][], or would be when it is not [hidden](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.2/#dfn-hidden), then its _semantic role_ is its **[implicit role][]**.

Reviewer 2: I'm not entirely sold on the objectiveness of the WCAG definition of "hidden". The way I interpret it is that an element is hidden when it doesn't generate any layout boxes, or generates only 0-dimension boxes, meaning that it isn't rendered. Thoughts?

Author: @kasperisager would this be better?
```suggestion
1. **Conflict** If the element has an [explicit role][] which is either `none` or `presentation`, but the element is [included in the accessibility tree][], or would be when it is [visible](#visible), then its _semantic role_ is its **[implicit role][]**.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm pretty sure that's not the definition we'll want to use though. Per https://w3c.github.io/aria/#tree_exclusion, things are removed from the accessibility tree when they have either `display: none` or `visibility: hidden`.

Author: Then 
```suggestion
1. **Conflict** If the element has an [explicit role][] which is either `none` or `presentation`, but the element is [included in the accessibility tree][], or would be when it is not [excluded from the accessibility tree](https://w3c.github.io/aria/#tree_exclusion), then its _semantic role_ is its **[implicit role][]**.
```
